Hello and welcome. Good morning or
almost afternoon.
I'm Lloyd Miner, dean of the Stanford
School of Medicine, and it's wonderful
to see you all here today. Our
aspirations start right here in our
community.
We're committed to being the very best
neighbor we can be to the people in
Northern California. You, our neighbors,
to be the place where all of you turn
when you need the services that we
offer. That's medical care. And it's
also information and resources, days
like today for the benefit of you and
your families.
So let's turn our attention now to our
next very exciting offering, the vision
of our keynote speaker, Sedarthur
Mukerji. You may know him as a Pulitzer
Prize-winning author of the Emperor of
All Malades, a biography of cancer. He
called his own work a biography, but if
you read it, you know that it reads like
a page turning thriller about the
history of cancer and its impacts on
society. We like to claim Dr. Muker G as
one of our own because he received his
undergraduate degree here at Stamford
and worked in the laboratory of Nobel
laurate Paul Berg defining the genes
that change the behavior of cancer
cells. From Stanford it was on to Oxford
with a road scholarship and then to
Harvard Medical School. Today he's an
assistant professor of medicine at
Columbia University where he pursues
medical research into the origins and
interventions for blood
cancers. He also continues to treat
patients as a cancer
physician. All of this while writing a
Pulitzer Prizewinning book. Of his book,
his publisher says that Dr. Mukerji
examines cancer with a cellular
biologist precision, a historian's
perspective, and a biographer's passion.
And next year, you'll be able to watch a
Kin Burns documentary based upon the
Emperor of All Malades scheduled to air
on
PBS. Today, he'll share with us his view
of this disease and his vision for the
future. After his remarks, my colleague
Amir Dan Rubin, CEO and president of
Stanford Hospital and Clinics will
conduct a session in which you can ask
questions. So, be thinking about what
you want to ask. And now, it's my great
privilege and honor to introduce Dr.
Sedarthur Muk Mukerji who will deliver
the talk. Thank you very
[Applause]
much. Thank you so much. Uh it's an
incredible honor being here. Um I I like
to say that I'm one of the children of
this auditorium because this is a place
named after Paul Paul Berg my my
undergraduate mentor who I had dinner
with yesterday. And um for me it's a
it's a it's also a very important place
historically geographically a very
important place because I when I trained
here uh I saw in a room not far from
here the very first child that I would
encounter who received chemotherapy and
was uh cured of leukemia. Um and then a
few months later in a room just uh a few
doors away uh the very very first woman
I saw die of breast cancer. Um and those
two polls uh represented to me as an
undergraduate uh the incredible work
that had been achieved, the incredible
achievements of medical sciences uh
through the passion of very very
dedicated physicians and researchers and
also the long journey ahead that will
change hopefully the landscape of cancer
as we move forward.
Um the the question that I want to
answer uh and ask first the question
that I want to ask is a question I think
is on everyone's minds which is uh where
are we uh how did we get here and what
happens next. It's a question that we
really need to ask as a community as a
society to figure out what the next
steps are in a disease that has
simultaneously been thwarted by us in in
several important instances. but also
continues to escape from our grasp over
and over again. Um, and it requires, I
think, uh, as as everyone here knows, it
requires a kind of continual
evaluation. I think we shouldn't make a
mistake. Cancer is by far one of the
most significant human challenges in our
history, bar none. Um and I think that
it demands a kind of ingenuity which we
have but it demands it constantly. It
demands it in a way that we can't uh
give up at one instance because it is as
I describe in my book I call it a red
queen's race. You know, there's a very
famous scene which I enjoyed from
reading uh uh Lewis Carol's books. Um
and the Red Queen says uh in the middle
Alice runs up to the Red Queen and says,
"Why are you running?" And the Red Queen
says, "Well, I'm running because the
world is moving with equal and opposite
ferocity in the other direction. I'm
running just to keep in place." Um so
cancer demands that kind of running. It
demands that kind of running and
ultimately it demands that kind of
running so that we are not in place but
in fact are moving forward. But even
maintaining our knowledge around cancer,
even maintaining what we know today
requires a kind of a deep commitment, a
deep effort and I and and one of the one
of the sort of central uh messages of my
talk is that we need to double that
effort. Uh that effort needs to be
doubled because it is with us. It is
among uh it's amongst us and unless we
generate a next series of uh innovative
advances, we will be left behind. and
the red queen will be falling behind in
this race. Um so what I thought I would
do today in service of those questions,
where are we today? What has happened?
What is the landscape look like? What is
the global view? Um I thought I would
take you a little bit through the
through through the history or through
the past because it informs us about how
we got here and how what happens next.
And I like to think about cam, you know,
the landscape of cancer is is often it
it's often feels like losing the forest
for the trees. You know, you read a
newspaper and someone says, you know,
what a wonderful advance happened
yesterday. Um, and so you pick up the
next newspaper and say, clinical trial
fails. The third article in the same
newspaper says, important advanced
against breast cancer. And you feel as
if there are so many trees that you
begin to lose the for what does the
forest look like? What does the
landscape look like? So I thought I
would take a a a bird's eye view as it
were and then zoom down on on individual
uh changes uh in cancer treatment and
prevention. And if you take that bird's
eye view, I like to think about cancer
in terms of four essentially four
revolutions. Uh not a thousand, not 300,
but four revolutions. And these four
revolutions, we're in the middle of the
fourth. uh these four revolutions I
think have redefined the way we think
about the treatment and prevention of
cancer and when we think forward I think
we need to go back to reimagine these
four structural revolutions as it were
in cancer so I'm going to start with my
first
slide
that it's right here
um long before that very first
revolution arrived uh there was a a long
history that predated it. Cancer is
thought about as a modern disease, but
in fact it is an ancient disease uh
probably one of the most ancient
diseases we know. This is a picture of u
one of the first medical documents that
we possess as humans, the Edwin Smith
Papyrus, which describes a case of
breast cancer. We don't know the words
for it because that we we don't have
actually the vocabulary, but we can tell
from the case description that this was
a case of breast cancer. And certainly
if you look at ancient specimens of
cancer, cancer is present. This is a a a
bone tumor found in a mummy uh from from
the ancient world in which we know
there's a there's a physical presence of
cancer in the ancient world. But there
was no theory really that explained this
for a long time. Cancer was thought to
be a visitation of fate, a terrible uh
visitation of destiny and left as such
until for the first time the first
theory of cancer began to arise and that
was promulgated by several physicians.
We don't even know if there was one such
physician or whether there was a
conglomeration of them. But Galen uh the
great Roman physician put forward the
first theory of cancer and that was that
cancer was an excess of black bile.
Galen argued that all diseases all human
physiology could be explained by four
major liquids that were fluids in the
body. Black bile, yellow bile, blood and
flem. I call it a hydraulic theory of
pathology. One thing goes up, something
else goes down. Um and ultimately he
thought that all diseases would be
explained by these four a kind of
cardinal axis of of a fourdimensional
axis. And in fact there's only one
disease one other disease that Galen
ascribed to an excess of black bile and
that was depression. In fact the word
melancholy literally translates to
melancholate black bile and there's
something very evocative about the idea
that in the ancient world right in the
ancient world the psychic and physical
manifestations of a disease depression
cancer were linked together. that it is
not a coincidence that they still remain
uh among the outer fronts of what can be
treated by modern medicine. Um and very
soon after this theory of black bile,
there were attempts to surgically remove
cancer but also remove the bile from the
body as if to say that there's a
systemic component to cancer and that
that has to be bled out in this case.
This is a an archival picture of a
so-called sculptatus mastctomy in which
uh the woman in this case was treated
with for with uh with surgery followed
by a by the bleeding of the removal and
attempted removal of black bile. But of
course unfortunately as you can see from
this very uh very brutal procedure many
of these women would still relapse with
breast cancer and die of breast cancer.
But what was really missing was what I
call the first revolution of cancer. And
that is a very simple idea which blazed
through the world um somewhere in the
1860s and 1870s and was really
consolidated by the early 1900s. And
it's a simple idea but a profound idea
and that is that cancer is a disease of
cells. It is a disease of cells that
don't know how to stop growing. In fact
at this point of time in the 1860s there
were very very few diseases of cells as
it were. People thought people ascribed
lots and lots of different reasons to
have uh diseases. Uh heart attacks were
explained in particular ways but cancer
was now ascribed to disease of cells by
a man. Uh this is a much older picture
of him. He was no more no older than 34
when he made this then a radical uh uh
argument that in fact regardless of
whatever the cancers were breast cancer,
melanoma, liver cancer, leukemia, most
importantly cancer of the white blood
cells were all tied together by one
common pathophysiological mechanism and
that was an excess of cell division.
These cells did not know how to stop
growing. His name was Rudolph Burkow. Um
he worked in Germany. In fact, I I had
the there is something very chilling
about being able to look through as a as
a cancer doctor to be able to look
through Rudolph Workhouse's uh
microscope, which you can do if you go
to Berlin, you can. Um and in fact,
Virkow made this very strong claim that
cancer was a disease of cellular origin.
Now, once again, very quickly, we moved
from that understanding of cancer as a
disease of cellular origin to the first
attempt to now use that information and
translate that information into cancer
treatments. And the treatment uh which
was available made available
contemporaneously with uh with Verkow
was surgery. So if it was a cell a group
of cells a group of dividing cells then
we could cut the cells out and thereby
cure cancer. This is a a picture of Bill
Roth operating um in in in Austria. And
in Bill Roth's clinic came the person
who uh as a student uh the person who
would really redefine or and push the
boundaries of this uh of the treatment
of cancer based on the idea that cancer
originated locally in an organ and could
be therefore cured or removed uh by uh
by aggressive surgery and that was
William Stewart Halstead. Halstead was a
young man when he went to Bill Roth's
clinic and in Bill Roth's clinic he
learned to perform incredibly intricate
operations. He came back to New York and
subsequently came back to uh went to
Hopkins uh in Baltimore where he studied
where he started studying breast cancer.
Now in in Bill Roth's clinic, Halid
discovered a new anesthetic uh called
cocaine uh and he actually began he was
a very bold experimentter. He began to
use it on himself to provide anesthesia
because he thought he would use it to in
his surgery. And by the time he came
back from Bill Ross Clinic, Halstead was
a raging addict to cocaine. Um, and he
was he came from a wealthy family and
the drug of choice for cocaine addiction
to treat cocaine addiction was another
medicine then called morphine. Um, and
so this is not uh so Halid was then
treated with uh uh morphine to cure his
cocaine addiction. But in fact now he
became dyed to both cocaine and morphine
and remained so for the rest of his
life. In fact, his closest surgical
trainees, including his residents, would
never know this. He would scrub out
mid-surgery apparently inject himself,
come back into surgery, and finish his
his operations. It was a testament to
his self-discipline. Um, the the the
disease that Halstead thought that he
would attack uh with with with his full
ferocity was breast cancer. Halstead
thought that he would understand the the
local treatment of breast cancer and
push that with as much innovation as
possible. And Halstead made a very bold
conjecture, a very bold theory. He
argued that if indeed cancer is a
disease of cells and if indeed cancer
originates uh in a single nidis in in
the breast, then operating more
operating more aggressively uh and
removing not only the the tissue but all
its surrounding tissue should cure
cancer. Now, and he did in order to
prove this theory, in order to push this
theory forward, he began to launch first
a a surgical operation called the
mastctomy and then subsequently a
surgical operation called the radical
mastctomy in which the attempt was made
to remove as much tissue as possible.
And Halstead students began to push this
idea even more uh strongly even deeply
and he began to move towards an ultra
radical or a super radical mastctomy all
in the service of a theory that of
course cutting more mean meant curing
more. This is a picture from one of
Halstead's original papers uh describing
uh the pro the procedure u the the the
script at the bottom is from Halstead.
It says the patient was a young lady
that I was very loathed to disfigure
because these operations were
disfiguring. They were very very
difficult. They stretched into several
hours not only removing the breast but
the clavicle tissues under the um the
muscles under the breast the pectoralis
major the pectoralis minor and so forth
and also deep into the into the aorta uh
the nodes around the aorta to try to
cure cancer. Now he was successful.
Halstead was successful. In fact many
many patients with advanced breast
cancer would benefit from Halstead's uh
very systematic dissection of the
disease. The problem as Halstead uh
began to realize but never fully uh
conceived. The problem of course was
that for a woman uh in whom the breast
cancer had already metastasized a more
radical surgery a more radical operation
would not help. Uh it wouldn't because
the as it were the cancer had already
left its local confines. And ironically,
for a woman who had tissue cancer was or
was was restricted to begin with, more
aggressive radical surgery wouldn't help
either because you were doing too much
for for a cancer that was locally
restricted. So in fact, peculiarly it
was perfectly mismatched to the two
poles of cancer. either for women women
who had local disease, doing more
aggressive surgery was not helpful or
doing more aggressive surgery and
disfiguring a woman who already had
metastatic disease was not helpful. And
it was this realization which which took
nearly 100 years long after Halstead was
dead. This realization took a 100 years
to really put into place. And it was it
was only 100 years years later that a
clinical trial could be launched uh that
would that ultimately tested the radical
mastctomy against a simple mastctomy
with radiation or a lumpctomy with
radiation and un and fortunately
unfortunately there was no difference.
Now you could ask yourself why did it
take a hundred years and there are
several reasons behind it. Well one
reason is cancer theories of cancer are
very powerful. We try, we want to
believe theories and experiments done in
order to service those theories have to
be performed all the time. We cannot
become trapped by our own theories of
cancer. No matter how powerful they seem
to be, they have to be put into
experimental uh to they have to put to
test experimentally. And in in the
particular case of the radical
mastctomy, that experiment became very
difficult to perform for several
reasons. First of all, the word radical
mastctomy. I mean who would if if the
word if the word was radical mastctomy
who would subject themselves or their
mother or their sister to the
non-radical version of the surgery. Uh
the word itself became a trap uh in
which surgeons would say why would I
offer the inferior version of therapy to
a woman when I know that the word itself
suggests that this is the right the the
most aggressive therapy uh for that
particular cancer. And women on just to
carry on that same legacy women said why
would I give myself the inferior
treatment. In fact, this trial became
impossible to run because no one wanted
to enroll in the control arm of the
trial. No one wanted to be so and you
know people have described this when you
speak to surgeons uh in the from the
1950s and 1960s they would say they
describe this as water water everywhere
but not a dropped drink patients
patients everywhere but not one person
to put on the control arm of the trial
and it took a 100 years before. So this
is I think in some ways the first
counter lesson to the idea of the theory
of cancer. Theories of cancer are very
important. We need them, but we also
need to be able to disband them. Every
theory needs to have proposed an
experiment that will either prove or
disprove it. And those experiments are
carried out by patients. They're carried
out by patients in collaboration with
their physicians.
Um well continuing this continuing this
idea of of theories of cancer uh the
local theory of cancer then moved on to
the to to the to the to the notion or to
the idea that even if surgery was not
sufficient perhaps a a a more invisible
knife a different kind of strategy would
now be successful. And in fact around
the time that Halstead was beginning to
launch his radical operation there
arrived a piece of technology that would
actually allow uh surgeons and their
colleagues to intervene on cancer even
without cutting into the tissue and that
was radiation therapy. This is a picture
of Marie Cury of course uh the woman who
found radium. Um this is actually an
interesting picture. This is the child
being treated at the Stanford clinic.
One of the first children. This is one
of the first patient zeros being treated
at the Stanford clinic for eye tumor a
retinol blastoma. We know a little bit
about this child actually. He left a
series. He was alive for about 70 years
after the this treatment. Um and he was
cured uh by through radiation treatment.
Um and then a kind of darker note to all
of this is which is that while on one
hand these treatments were successful
like surgery in removing local cancers,
they also began to reach a kind of
fundamental limit. And that limit was
that if if you use these
indiscriminately, they would actually
not only cure cancer, of course, but
they could also cause cancer. And that
was a big mystery. It was a big We'll
come back to that mystery because it did
not fully explain how cancer could be a
disease of cells, but why radiation put
on those cells could cause cancer. Hold
that thought because we'll come back to
it because it's these disruptive
thoughts, these things that don't fit
that ultimately generate new theories.
So, we'll come back to that that idea in
a second. But in fact, this is a picture
of u of an advertisement that I found um
in in the in in in in a magazine from
the 1920s of a paint called undark.
Undark was radium infused paint. And
someone thought it was a very good idea
that you could paint your clocks with it
so that when you looked at your watch,
you could wake up in the middle of the
night and you could you could look at
your watch. And in fact, young women
were uh employed to put uh radium paint
onto clocks. And many of them were
encouraged because they wanted to keep
the writing sharp, they were encouraged
to lick the brush as they went along.
Um, and in fact, uh, nearly all of them
were virtually glowing with
radioactivity. The radium has an
incredible ability to go into the bones.
They became sused with radioactivity and
almost all of them would die of comp
complications of that radioactive
induction. They would die of cancers. So
it was actually it was in some ways a
real world def de demonstration of that
dichotomy that on one hand of course
radiation could kill cancer cells but
for some reason that really didn't make
sense a mystery that it would actually
also cause cancer cells. So there was
something missing in the cellular theory
of cancer which needed to be uh needed
to be revisited as it were and we'll
come back to that to that
thought. Um and in the middle of all of
this uh while surgery and radiation were
were trying to cure cancer locally the
thinking grew uh and urgency grew that
perhaps they need we needed something
more than just surgery and radiation. We
needed a third modality and that was
chemicals. U chemotherapy of course
literally means chemical therapy. The
word chemotherapy was first applied not
to chemotherapy as we understand it but
to to to antibiotics because they were
chemical therapies in that case for
bacterial uh bacterial diseases. Paul
Erlick was the first person to um invent
some of the first antibiotics and Paul
Eric spent the the last part of his life
looking for not just antibiotics not
just things that would kill microbial
organisms but actually kill cancer cells
and discriminate killing cancer cells
from normal cells. So, Errolik argued
that surgery and radiation were good
enough. They were important modalities
for the treatment of cancer, but we
needed a third uh a third part of the
triad. And that third part of the triad
was chemicals. These chemicals would go
into the body. He thought of them as
microscopic surgeons who would go into
the body, excise cancer cells, kill
them, sparing normal cells and thereby
uh and he he he invented he was actually
the first person to invent a lovely
phrase for them. He called them magic
bullets. It's a word that rings through
the idea rings through the history of
cancer chemotherapy for its history and
they were magical because they would
discriminate between the cancer cell and
the normal cell. Um polaric died little
realizing that in fact the very first uh
chemical treatments for cancer would be
not magical but at least bullets because
they came from war gases. Uh so in the
in the in the mid uh 1900s uh for the
first time as you know as the war broke
out uh new gases were invented toxic
gases poisonous gases were invented and
this is a picture of mustard gas bombing
in Italy in Bari Harbor and very soon
pathologists including a pair of
pathologists from this university from
Stanford noted that in patients in
soldiers sorry not patients soldiers who
had been bombed with mustard gas there
was a rapid uh depletion
of white blood cells in their bone
marrow. If you looked at their bone
marrow, the white blood cells had
disappeared. And so these pathologists
made the conjecture that if this was
really true and if all the other tissues
were left behind, maybe if you took a
different concentration of this mustard
gas and you gave that mustard gas
introvenously, maybe you would kill
white blood cells that had turned
cancerous and spare the rest of the
body. It was a bold conjecture and in
fact it was tested very soon after in
the 1950s at Yale at Memorial at
Colombia. Um and and it was found for
the first time that if you diluted the
mustard gas and gave it appropriately
you could actually give patients chem
would give patients remissions from
cancers. The very first cancer to be
thus treated was treated uh a silver
smith was given uh he was about 50 odd
years old was given a a diluted version
of muscular gas with a with a big
lymphoma. he had a remission but
unfortunately would relapse and die uh
later. But this idea that you could now
take a chemical poison, a poisonous
chemical, really an inhibitor of
cellular growth, something that kills
cellular growth and if you gave it under
the right circumstances that you could
somewhat selectively kill cancer cells
and spare normal cells is the basis of
of much of modern chemotherapy. It is
the basis of nearly all of chemotherapy
that predated the 1980s, but it is the
basis still of much of modern
chemotherapy. We'll come back to this
idea again in a second, but that was all
because of the discovery of of these
mustard gas bombings and their
consequence. Now, there's several
features to be noted about this idea.
Number one is all these drugs were
discovered empirically. That is that
they were found essentially by accident
in the case of mustard gas by accident.
and they were discovered as general
inhibitors or general uh general uh chem
chemicals that would in general dampen
cellular growth. So it was based again
on a simple single theory. We're still
talking about a theory of cancer which
had arisen in the 1900s. We're now in
the 1950s but the treatments of cancer
still are going back to that simple
statement cancer is a disease of cells.
It is a disease of growing cells. And in
fact more and more such chemotherapies
were deployed. And by the mid 1950s,
there was not one but two or three of
them empirically discovered cellular
poisons that killed growing cells and
appeared to have a narrow selectivity
for cancer cells versus normal cells.
All dependent on that simple statement
on that simple hypothesis about the
cellular origin of cancer. And the next
series of drugs uh came out of Boston um
and those were uh antivitamins. So not
killers of cellular growth derived from
mustard gases but also accidentally
discovered serendipously discovered
anti- anti antivitamins that would kill
bone marrow cancers in this case and
that was work done by Sydney Farber who
was a pathologist working on children.
Now Sydney Farber particularly focused
on a disease called children's acute
lymphablastic leukemia a variant of
leukemia which was very lethal in
children and he began to use anti
antivitamins uh for that same purpose.
But essentially we're still talking
about uh as I said before empirically
discovered chemicals which happen to be
inhibitors of cellular growth going back
to Verkow's hypothesis about cancer as a
cellular disease. Um on just a quick
side note uh a little story here uh
about about the I became very interested
in the very first patients who received
chemotherapy. I think of them as kind of
our first teachers, our our our the the
patients who really mark the moments
important moments in this journey. Um
and I knew uh for instance that uh that
uh from if you look if you look at a
scientific paper of course you can know
what the patient you you know something
about the patients but their names are
anonymized. Uh one of the interesting
things about writing medical history is
that you have to remove that. You have
to go back behind the paper as it were
move the curtains back and find who the
people were. to make them into human
beings again. Um, and so I was
interested in in who these first
patients were and I knew that the first
child to be treated with chemotherapy
was u was a child whose name was RS but
I didn't know anything more about that
child. Um so I was in Boston actually
sitting in children's hospital where
Barber had been working and I was I I
went on a quest to find RS. Um and I
started writing emails. I became
somewhat obsessed with it. I wrote a
hundred emails trying to find this child
and nothing came back. This was in 2006.
I was in the middle of the buried in the
middle of my book and then I thought um
I was I became really dejected and I I I
took a I said I went in to to India to
my parents house for a vacation and
someone said you know um there's a
historian of of chemicals u who lives
three blocks from your parents house.
Now we're 6,000 miles away from Boston.
um and said, "Go visit this guy." And uh
I went, it was in the evening. I said,
"Well, I have nothing else to do." So, I
walked over uh a few blocks from my
parents. I had a long conversation with
him. And then I was leaving uh kind of
mid-inter evening. And he says to me,
"Uh, by the way, you know, I was in
Sydney Farber's clinic in
1971." Really? And he said, "Oh," and he
gave me a roster uh and pictures of
several of his patients, including all
the first people who were on trial.
"Would you like this?" And he plucked it
out of his shelf and he handed me this.
Um and this of course is a picture uh
which is not on any searchable index. It
is actually from a a a magazine, an
evening uh magazine uh from Boston of
two children and his name was Robert
Sandler. RS was Robert Sandler. Uh this
is how you write books. You have to
travel 6,000 miles away, find something,
and then come back. So in interestingly,
I could come back then exactly to the
same desk where I was working. And now
10 minutes away from there was this
child's house. I could actually go to
the house and in fact um the Ken Burns
film begins at the house. It begins at
that at the child's house. Uh and so I
dedicated my book to Robert Sandler. My
book is dedicated to Robert Sandler and
those who came before and after him um
as a kind of homage to everyone who
serviced us by um by providing the kind
of knowledge that we need to move cancer
forward. Now this story which is a
circular story going far away to find
something that is next to you um has a
kind of second circle circle of uh of
stories which is that about a few uh
weeks after my book was published I got
a phone call in my office from from this
gentleman and that's Robert Sandler's
twin so imagine the dissociative
experience so his name is Elliot u the
imagine the following experience You go,
he lives in Maine. You go to a
bookstore. I hadn't heard of him. He
hadn't heard of me. You go to a
bookstore and you you're interested in
in cancer because your your twin died of
it uh as a child, this uh this this
child. And you open a book and you find
it dedicated to your brother. Um which
is what happened. So he this so he he of
course found the book and then he called
me up. Um and so I got to know of course
the full story behind all of this. I'm
going to tell you one more story uh
which is important. Uh the mother uh
here is Helen Sandler. I I had the I had
the opportunity to meet her. Um and
Helen Sandler said to me something very
you know thankfully fortunately my my
book won lots of awards but to me the
most most important comment uh that
anyone has ever made about Emperor is
Helen Sandler's comment. She said to me
when when uh when Robert died u Sydney
Farber uh begged her to perform an
autopsy on the child and she said no you
know he's had enough. uh he's gone
through the that terrifying treatment. I
just want his sanctity uh maintained.
And he kept insisting. He said, you
know, this is the only way we will learn
for do it not for me but for children
who will come come afterwards. And
finally she relented. Um and she
regretted that decision her entire life.
And she said to me that reading my book,
reading about Robert again sort of
closed that circle. So three full
circles as it were of journeys that came
around fully. But a reminder again of
what the role that people like you,
patients, people like me, physicians and
the role that we have together in moving
this uh this this vision forward.
That idea that now you could now you had
not one chemical but now several
chemicals all as I said empirically
discovered chemicals that uh stopped
cellular growth was brought to its full
fruition uh by studies that followed
this in the 1950s and 1960s. This is a
picture of two men then very young men
who moved to the National Cancer
Institute in 1950s who began now to take
one such chemical and combine it with
other chemicals. So this is the thing.
This is the birth of what we recognize
as combination chemotherapy. Two or
three chemicals now of of inhibitors of
cellular growth or or or cellular
metabolic poisons that allowed them to
now deploy these in combination against
cancers. And they much like Sydney
Farber focused on blood cancers and in
particular on the same disease that
Farber had become interested in which
was acute lymphablastic leukemia and
others. This is a picture actually taken
again not very far from here probably a
few hundred feet from here of another
giant in this field Henry Kaplan um uh
who began at Stanford in the 1960s to
not not only combine chemotherapies but
also combine chemotherapies with very
carefully directed radiation to try to
see if you could cure uh another disease
that was at that time very difficult to
cure and that was Hodkdins disease
Hodkins lymphoma and together these
efforts by the mid 1960s revealed a very
important important uh a very important
series of results. Number one, it was
found that for certain cancers, Hodgkins
disease and for uh lymphablastic
leukemia, in fact, the combination of
these chemotherapies could achieve cures
that were previously unachievable. So,
just to give you an example of that, um
acute lymphablastic leukemia when Robert
Sandler walked into Sydney Farber Clinic
had a mortality rate of 100% and a cure
rate of 0%. uh by the 1950s because of
the efforts of Emir fry and fry and some
of the efforts of Henry Kaplan in that
disease that uh cure rate had climbed to
40%. By the 1960s it had climbed to 70%
and by the 1980s and 1990s the number
that we have right now is around 80 to
90%. So this this disease was completely
incurable in 1950 in the span of of 25
years became largely curable although
there's still struggles in that disease
itself but became largely curable. So a
transformative effect in that in that
disease. Hodgkins disease metastatic
Hodkdins disease had a cure rate of 0%
uh in the 1940s and 1950s. By the 1960s
because of the efforts of of Henry
Kaplan and and his many colleagues had
climbed to around 40 50 and 60%
depending on the subtypes that you had
of of Hoskins disease. So real strides
in some diseases. But what was also
clear from these original trials by the
1970s that there was also a failing that
somehow or the other other cancers
metastatic breast cancer, metastatic
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer,
prostate cancer were not so easy to cure
with these combination chemotherapies.
In fact, the toxicities often
overwhelmed the cure rates that were
being achieved by these combination
chemotherapies. So something was still
missing. There was a missing element and
we had to now I said this before the red
queen had now move again and start
building up a different strategy to move
forward because the world of cancer had
all of a sudden began to move far faster
in the opposite direction. A new
ingenious strategy was needed to move
forward. U some of that strategy came
not for from cancer uh physicians but in
fact from cancer advocates. Cancer
advocates working in the committee.
There's a picture of Mary Lazer who
whose role in this history is enormous.
not because she was a cancer researcher,
but because she really dedicated herself
to to to to cancer researchers to be
able to move their activities forward by
what she called not fundraising only,
but fundraising. She was a she was
probably the most fierce advocate of
biomedical research. Still remains one
of the most fierce advocates of biome
medical research. Even after her death,
her foundation continues to be one of
the most fierce advocates of biomedical
research. and she began to campaign
everyone that she knew nationally and
internationally, Congress uh and many
others to really uh to really focus on
cancer and launch what would be called
the war on cancer. So much so that if
you woke up in
1969, you would find a newspaper
advertisement, a full-size, full page
newspaper advertisement which said, "Mr.
Nixon, you can cure cancer with cancer
cells eating off the bottom of that uh
bottom of that last uh word." Um and the
and the idea was that uh launched by
Mary Lazer, the idea was look, we've had
astonishing successes with a few
cancers, Hodkdins disease, lymphoplastic
leukemia, certain variants of breast
cancer. Why don't we now just
consolidate these successes and pour
national resources in in a focused way
to build the so-called war on cancer?
And this is really the announcement of
the war on cancer, the National Cancer
Institute act, which became the war on
cancer. And indeed the the the
astonishing advancements all based of
course going back to that simple idea.
The astonishing advancements indeed did
raise a huge public interest in in in
transforming the world of cancer and the
war on cancer was announced as you very
well know in
1971 and then reality began to hit and
that's this is the reality over here. So
this is the announcement of the war on
cancer, the expansion of the National
Cancer Institute budget uh as resources
began to be poured in to the war on
cancer. And on the right side now
tracking down from the 1970s to the
1980s uh in men and women uh the actual
mortality rate from cancer. Uh the red
line is the expected rate if things had
moved on. The actual mortality rate
which was expected in the 1970s to look
like
this but in fact looked like this. And
that was the sobering uh sobering
realization that something was still
missing that in cancer prevention and in
cancer treatment that we hadn't
innovated enough to be able to change
this line as it were from a plateau into
a deeply dipping curve. And so all of a
sudden it was as if the war on cancer
had presented not a challenge to cancer
physicians but a challenge to all of us
cancer physicians, cancer activists,
cancer advocates, people with cancer in
their families to now rethink, go back
to this drawing board and rethink and
now come up with a second line of or
second strategy of trying to figure out
the the the attack. Well, the only way
we know forward is through reason. the
activity of reason is the only uh is the
only mechanism that we can deploy to
move forward in any disease and in
particular in cancer. So the the going
back to the drawing board meant going
back to a theory again which brings me
to the second uh the second idea as it
were of cancer uh the second phase of
cancer reach the second idea of cancer
biology and that is that cancer is a
disease not only of cells but of genes.
Now remember way back when remember that
that that peculiarity that that sand in
the eye of cancer theory which was
radiation for some reason was able to
not only cure cancers but cause cancers
and several people over the ne over the
over the intervening 30 or 40 years had
wondered why is it that radiation they
must be doing something to the cell that
causes or changing the cell in some way
that causes cancer. And in the meantime,
several people had figured out that one
thing that radiation does is it changes
genes. It causes mutations in genes. And
it was through that line of thinking, as
I said, a sand in the eye of of of
cancer theory as a disease of cells that
began to illuminate the idea that in
fact cancer was of course a disease of
cells, but in fact what was really
changing were genes. And so there are
several actors in this, several players
from here from around the around the
world. um I won't name all of them but
but the essence of the theory was the
following that is that the very genes
that cause normal cellular growth if you
mutate them if you change them for
instance by virtue of X-rays you release
malignant cellular growth and ultimately
that's cancer now we take this idea many
of us take this idea for granted now but
this was an ex extremely radical idea in
the 1970s and 1980s many of you who
actually remember the first times uh
this idea was announced. It of course
was was a revolutionary idea and also a
very chilling idea because here we were
hoping that in fact it was going to be
easy at the genetic level to dissociate
cancer from normaly. But what the
genetics told us was just the opposite.
the genetics was telling us was in fact
that the very genes that control normal
cellular growth that allow your embryos
to grow that allow our hands to grow
that allow wounds to be healed that
allow stem cells to grow if you mutate
those genes you ultimately release
abnormal growth abnormal cellular growth
and that causes cancer. Now the
important consequence of this is that
cancer therefore becomes a disease
really like nothing else. it becomes a
disease in which normaly and illness are
twinned like Robert and Elliot Sandler.
They're they're part of the same
spectrum and that small changes from
normaly the very genes that control
growth now become uh manifest uh in
their malignant form in
cancer and this began to explain of
course why cancers were caused by
environmental influences. This is a
picture of PCL pot which one of the
first people to figure it out. This is
the surgeon general announcing that in
fact tobacco causes cancer. If you
didn't have a genetic theory of cancer,
it'd be hard to explain how things like
chemicals in the environment would
somehow or the other coax your cells to
start dividing abnormally. If you had a
genetic theory of cancer, you could now
say, well, the real missing link is it's
genes plus environment. the environment
impinges on genes, changes their
structure, changes their it causes
mutations and thereby releases cancer or
or causes cancer. And that led to the
third idea or the third phase of of
cancer uh the third general phase of
cancer biology, cancer theory, cancer
treatment, and that is cancer is a
disease not only of cells, not only of
genes, but is a disease of genomes. By
genomes of course we mean not one gene
but the entire complement of about
20,000 odd genes that all human beings
possess. So every cell has a complement
of about 20 to 25 25,000 genes and
cancer is a disease where not one gene
is changed but multiple genes have to be
changed. So going back to this uh going
back to trace this intellectual history
uh we we understood that alterations in
growth causes causing genes cause
cancer. The question is how many how
common are they? what are they? What
what is their identity? And in fact,
several uh studies uh uh indicated that
in fact not one one gene was
insufficient that you'd have to have
many genes. That in fact our cells had
natural uh barriers against growth.
Growth is a very very fundamentally
important process for us. So important
that our cells have complicated systems
to compute whether they should grow or
not grow. The decision for a cell to
grow is an incredibly important decision
and it requires more than one decision
point and it's when many such decision
points are abnormally altered by
mutations in genes that you ultimately
get uh ultimately release a cell that is
uh that that can't stop growing or grows
abnormally and that of course is cancer.
So I want to spend a few minutes here
because now we're beginning to come
close to our to to to how cancer
biologists understand cancer. So we're
we're now beginning to circle a very
contemporary description of cancer from
the scientific point, but it has many
many important implications about how we
go ahead and what happens next. So here
is a a hypothetical picture of a woman
who comes into a clinic. Uh let's say
she has breast cancer and the blank
sheet of paper, forget about the dots
for a second. blank sheet of paper has
every gene in her body, all the 24,000
genes in her body and the first gene is
on the top and you have every gene sort
of printed out all the way to the last
one and you have the capacity which we
do now because of technology invented
here and other places. We do now have
the capacity to ask the question what
genes have changed in her breast cancer
cell. Uh what are the alterations of
genes? So obviously some genes will be
genes that are involved in regulating or
computing growth control and you find
that you have one two three four five
six seven eight genes that have been uh
altered in this woman and they're spread
out in this kind of landscape view. Now
here's the important point which is that
the next woman comes in also with breast
cancer. If Burkau were to look down his
microscope a 100 years ago he would say
well both of these are breast cancer.
They look identical under the
microscope. There's nothing no
difference about them. And yet when you
look at the genetic anatomy, the genomic
anatomy, you find that there are some
shared genes that are changed in two
breast cancers, but there are some
unique genes as well. So every breast
cancer is its own breast
cancer. And then a third person comes
in, a third woman comes in and here too
you see some commonalities, but here is
another breast cancer which is its own
breast cancer. Now you begin to now
understand the kind of complexity that
cancer biologists are dealing with.
They're dealing with a disease whose
number one genetic anatomy begs the
difference between normal genetic
anatomy because the the genes that
control growth are very closely allied
to normal genes that control growth and
number two they're dealing with
diversity of a phenomenal level. In
other words, every individual specimen
of an individual kind of cancer is its
own cancer. And that is of course the
the the challenge uh for us. That is the
challenge. You can you can create uh
these things called maps. Uh you know
you can take genes that are common and
make them into big peaks and genes that
are uncommon and make them into small
peaks. You can condense this information
using uh using complex data algorithms
into a picture. And this is actually now
you're staring the enemy in the face.
This is what the human cancer genome
begins to look like. This is from
colurectal cancer. Uh this is work work
done by Bert Vogglestein. And what you
see here are big peaks denoting the very
commonly altered genes, medium-sized
peaks denoting less commonly altered
genes across many specimens. And then of
course these dots, these dot, this dot
for instance refers to one gene which is
unique to one specimen of colorectal
cancer not present in any other specimen
of colorectal cancer. So the job now
therefore is to annotate every single
one of these genes and ask the question
is it driving the cancer? Is it not
driving the cancer? Is it incidental?
not incidental. Can there be a medicine
directed against this variant and can
there not be a medicine against that
variant? Now, you could say, "Oh my god,
that job is impossible. This is an
impossible." The diversity of cancer on
one hand and also the fact that normal
growth and abnormal growth really depend
on the same genetic compliment. Those
two tasks make it impossible. But if
that was the case, of course, we'd have
given up longer. We we we cannot give
up. So we have to keep now looking gene
by gene and piece of anatomy by piece of
anatomy to try to genetic anatomy to try
to move forward in trying to treat
cancers and in fact it's not all
hopeless because in fact you can do
that. uh way back even in the 1980s when
the first genetic maps were being
figured out of cancer there were already
attempts uh this is a picture from of an
important trial from Japan from China
and France which allowed uh the
targeting of a of of a particular
variant of leukemia acute promyioidic
leukemia APML with a single medicine and
just to tell you if you find these
medicines the effects can be dramatic
acute promitic leukemia was the most
lethal form of myogynous leukemia ever.
So in other words, if you had if you had
the unfortunate luck of having myogynous
leukemia, not children's alll, it's a
different disease. Myogenous leukemia,
if you had that disease, you would say
to yourself as thank god it's not acute
proosic leukemia because that is a
virtually uniformly lethal disease. And
yet the introduction of one medicine,
retinoic acid, changed that disease to
the one leukemia that you would want to
have if you if if your cup were to run
it over in that direction because it is
now the most curable variant of acute
myogynous leukemia. So it's like
flipping a switch. You literally flipped
a switch and all of a sudden a med a
disease that was incredibly lethal with
a appropriate uh genetic annotation, the
appropriate research, the appropriate
trials began to be uh uh much more
curable disease. Still not fully curable
but much more curable
disease. And this experience has
actually been repeated gene by gene,
example by example in other cancers. And
yet there remain big ch. This is a
picture of of chronic myological
leukemia. yet another disease doesn't
doesn't resemble the other leukemias
Brian Rooker who found along with
working with a team of other other
chemists and scientists who found that
in fact you could take a molecule and
you could lodge that molecule like an
arrow uh into the gene that was driving
uh this particular cancer one of the
most again a cancer that was very very
lethal uh and then all of a sudden you
could convert that cancer into a chronic
disease for most patients so much so
that patients who are responding to
glevec really don't have um a lifespan
that seems to be any different than
patients who don't have uh leukemia at
all. They actually their lifespan is
normalized. They still have to take a
pill to keep the remission going, but
it's a really remarkable uh development
in that
cancer. And this has been repeated
elsewhere with other cancers that may be
more familiar to you. This is a uh this
is breast cancer uh her two positive
breast cancer. again a a careful
analysis of its genetic anatomy, finding
one common gene that seemed to be
present in multiple specimens of her two
positive breast cancer. And this is
patient zero of her. She was the woman
uh Barbara Bradfield is um was a woman
treated 16 years ago uh with the uh with
an antibbody in this case uh for uh for
this cancer. uh she had metastatic
breast cancer and actually still
survives today uh with a with a breast
cancer that was virtually untreatable
about 16 or 17 years ago and and this
particular variant of cancer just last
month had three more medicines that came
out for this particular variant of of
breast cancer. So again a series of
remarkable treatments for selected
cancers as we move forward with this
with this anatomy genetic anatomy. But
then like all theories even this begins
to come to its peak and it's a reminder
why we need to keep moving forward keep
moving innovating. This is a picture of
uh CML, chronic myogynous leukemia, now
treated with that new drug I talked
about, now no longer new, called ematan.
Um and uh you see the patients who
didn't receive the drug uh dropping off
in survival in contrast to patients who
did receive Gleevec. So as I said a a
large change um in survival and this
axis is on the order of 70 odd months.
So this is a significant amount of of
time five seven 10 years of of of
remission and some treatments as well.
This is breast cancer treated with
herptin another targeted therapy
genetically annotated targeted therapy
uh for breast cancer. And now we see
what we see is that metastatic breast
cancer you see that the months have
shrunk. We're now at 50 months over here
with with a patient with metastatic
breast cancer. Still patients who
receive drug are get an enormous
benefit. But it's not like GLvec. The
cancer is more complex. Its genetics are
is more complex. The therapy is more
complex. And the the the gains still
present are now more modest compared to
the the uh compared to glec. This is
melanoma. Again, a cancer that we've
begun to understand. We have begun to
understand its genetic anatomy. And now
we're shrinking down to this is
metastatic melanoma shrink shrunk down
to about 10 months. Still patients with
a little bit of benefit but at the end
of those 10 months with a targeted
therapy against their melanoma uh
against the genes that are driving the
melanoma but the cancers develop
resistance and then the patients die as
a consequence of the resistant disease.
So it is now we are living right now
this moment we're living through the uh
the the the end of one other era of
cancer therapy which is genetically
directed cancer therapy as a single
agent. We're we're finding out that in
truly complex cancers even that won't
do. We need to innovate once more again.
We to go back to the board and start a a
fresh to try to refresh what happens
next. So, I'm going to spend the last
few minutes talking about my visions and
actually my visions that are shared by
many people in the cancer field about
what happens next. What do we do? What
do we do from here? Where does the
drawing board go back? To me, what's
interesting, what's exciting is the
capacity to now incorporate all these
pieces of information in a way that's
datadriven and then convert that into
new treatments, prevention, and
potentially cures for some cancer. And
it's based on an idea which is now
taking root and that is that cancer is
not just a disease of cells and genes
and genomes but it's an organismal
disease. It lives in organism. It lives
in real human beings and it it's
sustained by physiology that lives
inside real human beings. So by
organismal I mean it we we think of
organisms as having physiology. They
have uh they have environments. They
have interactions. So can we now think
of cancer having physiology as well?
What does the physiology of cancer look
like? And if that if we can take now not
just the genetics, not just this a
cellular biology, but if you can think
about cancer as a physiological entity,
can you now intervene on cancer
physiology? Uh organisms live by virtue
of complex pathways. They live within
complex networks. Well, we need new data
and ways to integrate big data into a
way that makes sense of the physi
physiological networks that sustain
cancer. So just to give you one example
of this and how data plays into all of
this. I mean if you ask someone in the
1980s what cancer how cancer occurred
this is this is the time of the genetic
theory of cancer they say well there's a
mutation it changes a gene that causes
cancer. You came back by the 1990s now
all of a sudden the mutation sits at the
top of this and now you see a network of
connected events that allows the cell to
be disregulated grow abnormally in a
physiological sense and that ultimately
causes cancer. And this is now the same
pathway in 2014. That's what it looks
like now. So you see individual nodes
communicating with individual nodes and
you say my goodness this gives you a
headache. But to biologists it doesn't
give us a headache. Actually this is
because we want we we need to know
instead of building simplified models we
need to understand what the level of
complexity is because then we can go
back and and try to intervene on single
networks. So it's not one gene mutated
and all of a sudden boom you get an
abnormality in growth control. It is
that the the the alterations in genomes
are causing alterations in cellular
physiology. The way cells digest
chemicals, the way cells eat sugar, the
way cells consume oxygen, the way they
interact with the immune system. All of
this is happening and ultimately that is
what is excuse me unleashing the
abnormal growth of cancer cells. And
this is uh this is this is true not only
at the microscopic level, but it's true
at the macroscopic level. This is I'm
going to end with this last study which
emphasizes that this understanding of
cancer in the in in in a physiological
sense extends not only to organisms but
to networks of organisms to societies.
Um this is a study which I find
fascinating in which which was which was
performed in in Framingham in
Massachusetts in which uh and actually
went to the study site uh in which they
asked the simple question which is that
we know that smoking is a is a major
cause of lung cancer, lip cancer and
other kinds of esophageal cancer etc.
And we know we've we spent decades
trying to figure out how to stop
smoking. There are taxes, there are
campaigns against smoking. You watch the
television, you watch your and yet
smoking persists in a kind of
metaphorical analogy in the same way
that cancer seems to persist in human
society. So can we get rid of of
behaviors that that that that cause and
and sustain cancers in society? So what
they did was very interesting. They went
to this uh went to this uh this uh uh
village uh a small town in Massachusetts
and they said, "Okay, we'll create a
social map of every interaction with
every other individual." So in other
words, if you played golf with Mr.
Jones, you would be you'd be connected
in this map. Uh if you if your neighbor
is another person, that's another
connection. Your uncle is in this is
this a connection. So it's it's it's
Facebook before Facebook. Um uh so they
created a social map in this manner. And
then they asked a very important
question which is that now on top of
that social map, the social network, I'm
going to now superpose smoking behavior.
So every dot here in 1971 corresponds to
whether you smoked or not, how much you
smoked. uh etc. And then they asked the
third question which is now I'm going to
follow this network over time. So I'm
going to move this network from 1971 to
2000 to ask the question who continues
to smoke in despite the the anti-smoking
campaigns who quits and who starts.
What's very interesting is that in the
end the people who continue to smoke
versus those who quit really one of the
strongest determinants are their
neighbors their social neighbors. In
other words the social network is an
independent determinant determinant. The
social physiology is an independent
determinant of whether you quit or
whether you stay smoking. And so it
really begins to make us rethink about
addictive behaviors or behaviors in
general that are cancer-causing or not
not cancer causing. Taxation won't help
that necessarily. What you need is you
need you need to understand what the
structure is, what the physiology is, in
this case a macroscopic physiology. And
now rethink how can we excuse
me infiltrate those networks and disable
them in the same way and a microscopic
level how you can infiltrate and disable
individual cellular networks that cause
or sustain cancer. So I'm going to we
we've gone on a big journey and I'm
going to stop here. The journey begins
with cell with cells. It moves to genes.
it moves to genomes and ultimately ends
in physiology. And it's there's
something very satisfying I think in
being able to come back to this idea
over and over again and emphasizing that
we need innovation at every stage and
the minute we stop innovating the world
will switch and throw us behind it.
Thank you very
much. Thank you.
Well, uh, please join me again in
thanking Dr. uh, Mukerji for an
incredible talk. Thank
you. Um, I'd now like to open the floor
for a few questions just by brief
introduction. My name is Amir Dan Rubin.
I'm the president and CEO here at
Stanford Hospital and Clinics. And
probably like all of you, I am just
um super excited about this great
journey that you have taken us through,
but even more excited maybe about the
future. So, let's open it to the group.
There are microphones in the middle and
we have our orange shirt people are
handing out microphones. And yes, ma'am,
we have our first uh question over here.
Yes, I have a question. I am currently a
multiple myyoma patient having gone
through a stem cell transplant. I'm soon
going to be 69. But my first um attack
where I was told I had cancer, I was 20
and told I had a brain cancer, I did
not. But I underwent all kinds of nasty
treatments. Um and then went on to five
bladder cancers and then on to breast
cancer and then onto an ovarian cancer.
And when people ask me what was my
cancer of origin, um I honestly believe
it was changing my blood chemistry with
some of the uh treatments that I had
underwent when they thought I had uh a
brain brain cancer which included
mercury brain scanning tests and a bunch
of other things that came about as a
virtue of the fact that there were no
MRI, CT scans or whatever else back
then. Is that a valid well idea possibly
or no? I mean, I don't know what my
cancer of origin is, but I really think
since all the way since 1976, I've had
anemia and severe blood cancer problems.
I honestly believe that I probably had
uh multiple myyoma smoldering along all
along. Well, I think it's it's it's it's
certainly I don't know what what what
exactly you were treated with, but we
know that some of the uh some of the
cancer curing reagents um are
carcinogenic in themselves. I mean this
is an unfortunate bargain that we had to
take and have to take still actually
still we're in an era where we have to
take a bargain between cancer uh cancer
treatments. U it is my hope that we
won't have to do this anymore. In other
words, it's my hope that in 10 years we
will really be able to laugh at our
previous attempts, fumbling attempts at
chemotherapy. And I really really
sincerely hope that we will be able to
buy by the by the beginning of the next
decade begin to bring therapies which
are much much more targeted towards
individual alterations in genes. Um in
in particular cases when there are
multiple cancers in families, it's
actually worthwhile asking the question
whether there's a genetic component to
this as well. Almost always there's an
interaction between genes and and and
the environment. Just to tell you what
the unexplored quality of that is, I'll
just give you one example. If you take
breast cancer and you take familial
breast cancer in which we know that
there's a family history of breast
cancer and that's why it's being caused
uh through multiple generations, when
you ask the question how many of
familial breast cancers can be explained
by the genes that we know already cause
breast cancer, the answer is about 30%.
So in other words, 70% of cancer where
we know that there's a family history
and there has to be a genetic component,
at least a genetic component. 70% of
those cases we still don't know what the
actual genes are. So it is an it is
really a and the only way we'll know
those genes is if those patients
collaborate with physicians, if we form
alliances and figure out how we could
how because this is technologically now
available. This is this is now this is
tech technologically possible. So uh so
I if I had to make a conjecture I would
say that there was probably a
consequence of chemotherapies but it
sounds like there's some there there's
some gen genetics that needs to be
explored and maybe we're at the stage we
could probably explore
that. When do you declare cancer as
cure? I mean person has cancer, you give
him one of these magic treatments
and five years later it pops up again
and maybe he dies of a heart attack. So
is the cancer cured? Well, so there are
some there are some so the the answer is
it actually depends on the kind of
cancer. So for so
so what one of the things that that I
think has been a learning experience for
the medical community as well as for
patients is that it it is that the pace
of the original cancer dictates when a
person is declared cured or not. And
number two that in fact now we can go
back with much much deeper technology
and understand whether the new relapse
of cancer is because of a second cancer
that arose or because it was that
original cancer now coming back and
relapsing after after prolonged
remission. We actually still don't know
uh for many many cases. Now for rapidly
growing cancers like leukemia usually
that number is 3 to five years because
if by 3 to five years usually those
cancers have stopped growing but they're
slow growing tumors. Just to give you
one example, metastatic breast cancer
can be in remission for 15 years and
relapse. Uh metastatic colon cancer can
be in remission for 12, 13, 14, 15 years
and then relapse. In contrast, usually
leukemias don't behave like that. So it
really depends on the kind of cancer.
But in 10 years ago, we had very very
few tools which would allow us to answer
the simple question which is is the
second cancer new or is the second
cancer a consequence of the first
cancer. Those tools are clearly present
now. We have those tools without a
problem. So in the looking forward into
the future that is a very important
distinction. If it's the same cancer
being coming back then of course
treating you with the same therapies is
not going to help. If it's a different
cancer, then we can actually treat you
with the same therapies if particularly
if they were effective the first time
around. And this technology has already
been covered. We have this technology.
It will it will become available. It's
already become available for leukemias.
So it's a it's an important
technological innovation already
available
today versus 50 years ago or 20 years
ago. And secondly, I guess what's really
behind my question is are there things
in our environment today, I'm making the
assumption that there there is an
increase in cancer rates here maybe
incorrectly, but are there things in our
environment or in that we all carry cell
phones or there's a lot more chemicals
in the food we are there things that may
be contributing to that? Yeah. So, so
two very important questions. So, let's
talk about the cancer interest increase
in cancer rates.
It is a very you might think that it's
an easy to answer question but it's an
incredibly difficult to answer question
for the simple reason I'll give you a
couple of important points about it.
Number one is if you begin to look you
will begin to detect earlier and earlier
cancer because technology keeps
evolving. So of course if you looked
naively or if you looked at a quick
glance and ask the question well what
happened to breast cancer rates? Well it
look like this. And the reason it looks
like that is because if you point to
that kink in the curve, that's when
mimography is introduced, right? So
it'll look like this because you've
introduced a technique to to to to
diagnose cancer earlier and earlier. And
once you have that technique, of course,
earlier and earlier cancer will be
diagnosed. So you will be falsely
assuming that you in fact have an
increase in a rate of cancer in the
prevalence of cancer when it actually
doesn't actually change. So you have to
be careful about that piece. what you
can do so so really the so so the metric
that works very well is a very difficult
metric I'm going to talk about this I
talk about this extensively in the book
and that is that cancer related
mortality is immune to all of these
changes in other words the question that
we should be asking is are more people
dying of cancer today than they were
dying of cancer 10 years ago or 15 years
ago that's the question to ask now that
question is also a complicated question
because of course the whole population
is aging as in general So the population
is expanding over time and so if you
look at that of course there'll be more
cancer related deaths in 2014 than there
were in 1984 because the entire cohort
of population has expanded. So what we
do to in order to correct for that
there's a way to correct for that. So
you use a a very careful statistical
trick I describe it in the book to
correct for all of that. So you can now
really compare apples to apples 1988 to
2010. Now if you do all of this and ask
the question with the appropriate
controls is the is cancer related death
changing the answer is complicated but
important. U I have a slide and I I'll
show you what the actual cancers look
like. So you actually let's talk about
real data rather than talking in the
abstract. I didn't show this slide
because I was anticipating the uh
question. So this is what it looks like.
So on this side this is cancer related
mortality. So immunized against early
diagnosis. Um and what you see is a huge
variation between individual forms of
cancer. So just to give you some example
some highlights of this. This is lung
cancer and this is explicable. So this
is because of smoking. So essentially
this peak this rise is a consequence of
smoking in the 1950s 1960s. First among
men then following among women. If you
were to divide this curve up into men
and women, you'd see that. And this fall
is because of tobacco prevention. This
this curve goes out, I think, into the
2005 or something range. This curve has
continued to fall. Here's leukemia. We
talked about leukemia. You can see a
slow decline over time. And that is
because of treatment. Has nothing to do
with prevention. You can't really
prevent leukemia at this stage. We don't
know how to prevent leukemia, but that's
because of treatment. Lymphoma similarly
because of treatment. Colon cancer
because of treatment. Cervical cancer
because of prevention. So because of
papsmears and now to some extent because
of the of vaccines. If you were to look
at pancreatic cancer it looks like a
flat line right through. Uh if you look
at prostate cancer it goes up a little
bit and then comes down again. So in
each individual form of cancer uh it
these are the individual trends. Now if
you now were to slap everything together
what would it look like? It looks like a
line that starts off, it grows really
driven by lung cancer, grows over the
1970s and 1980s, grows to its peak in
the 1980s, begins to plateau. This is
now aggregate. I'm talking about
aggregate in general. And has begun to
plateau and has begun to drop down by
about 1% to 2% every year. So that is
the aggregate. So I'm sorry that's a
long answer. We have to talk about very
real numbers here. And it is cancer
dependent. It has to be mortality. can't
be cancer prevalence. For many cancers,
it's the the cancer mortality has
decreased. For many cancers, it's
remained the same. And for some cancers,
the the changes have been dramatic. Now,
you can take that and put it in your hat
and smoke it. All right, we have time
for one more question. One more
question, please. I have a question
here. Can you hear me? Yes. Is it on?
Um, they tell me that lung
cancer leads to brain cancer.
Now, is that so? No, it doesn't. So,
often when they're when they're saying
what what what they really mean is that
there are certain variants of lung
cancer that metastasize or can
metastasize to your brain and then
they're called brain cancer, but in
fact, not brain cancer at all. What they
are is what they are is lung cancer
that's moved to the brain and it should
be treated as so so one of the things
that we found out we know more and more
is that when lung cancer goes to the
brain for instance or when breast cancer
goes to the to the liver it doesn't
become the liver it remains breast
cancer in the liver in fact one of the
challenges to figure out how to treat
breast cancer in the liver and what the
similarities and differences are between
one and the other. That was the
question. But the other question was if
someone has prostate cancer and then has
a melanoma and then has leukemia. No,
not leukemia. Um
lymphoma is that related to So again it
would go back to to the question the
lady the question that this lady was
asking. And so think to take a step
back. There are two major influences
over here, right? So one influence is
the environment. The second influence is
genes and we know cancer is a
consequence of an intersection between
those two. Genes are activated or
inactivated by the environment
ultimately leading to cancer. So when
whenever I see a patient like this I
have always asked this very simple
question. What are the environmental
influences? What are the genetic
influences? What are the influences from
the family history? And are these
random? Right? So if you now compute all
of these together 10 years ago we had
absolutely very little technology that
would allow us to discriminate all these
pieces. These pieces seemed as if they
were sort of different parts of the
chessboard. Now the technology exists to
put these four things together and ask
the question in a much more intelligent
way. The problem and here's here's the
problem. The problem is even today if
such a case was to arise, we would treat
that patient with lymphoma therapy for
lymphoma, leukemia therapy for leukemia,
myoma therapy for myoma, brain cancer
therapy for brain cancer. It's as if you
know you're touching the elephant and
you have you know on some person sees
the tail and treats the tail. Some
person touches the trunk and teachs the
trunk. You have to integrate these
pieces of information and I think
of the data that we have now will allow
us to integrate this information. Uh we
could not do this 10 years ago. Thank
you very much. Thank you again. Thank
you so much.
The proceeding program is copyrited by
the board of trustees of the Leland
Stanford Jr. University. Please visit us
at med.stanford.edu.
edu.